---
layout: post
title: "The Myth of Civilization"
date: 
categories:
  - Games
image: /images/
image-sm: /images/
---

# The Myth of Civilization

Write a bit about a historical telling of actual gameplay here.

That isn't how it happened. That's easy enough to see. We look at a playthrough of _Civilization_ (_Civ VI,_ in this case) and the contrasts to recorded history are an entry point in to understanding the gameplay and the veneer which transforms a retelling of gameplay choices in to a historical narrative.

But aside from the obvious changes from recorded history, _Civilization_ more subtely describes a world that is not ours. Its systems portray a world that works differently than ours.

These changes are for the most part to create a better gameplay experience. And in that they succeed—_Civilization_ is a brilliant series. But we also need to be aware of the assumptions the series makes, because if we let those assumptions become our own we risk applying them to the world around us. For the actual world we see, for the history we've inherited, these ideas can make us blind to important contributions, important events, and the way the world actually works. If we let these assumptions guide our way forward 

To be utterly clear, I love _Civilization_ as a series, and _Civ VI_ in particular. This critical reading of the games' systems is from that deep appreciation of the impressive design of these wonderful games. It is born of playing _Civ VI_ and deeply enjoying it but noticing as I unpacked this latest iteration that it was subtly disturbing in how it says the world works. Loving a creative endeavor means investing in it and thinking it through.

For clarity I'll be using _Civilization VI_ as my point of reference for how each of these systems work. Many of them can be traced through other _Civ_ games as well.

## The Myth of Progress

## The Myth of Great Men & The Myth of Heroic Invention

> Alan Turing, attracted to the growing Aztek research complex, drives them towards the invention of the computer furthering their progress to Mars.

Civilizations in _Civ VI_ are driven forward by Great People. While not absolutely essential, getting the type of great person that most aligns with the victory you are pursuing is typically a large boost, and other great people are a considerable benefit. Each great person provides a specific benefit, typically usable only a few times. Alan Turing boosts progress towards computers, Genghis Khan improves units around him, and so on.

This is essentially a gameplay system modeling the [Great Man Theory](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Great_Man_theory). The Azteks discovered computers before anyone else because of Alan Turing. The Indian varu moved so swiftly towards Râ-Kedet because they were led by Genghis Khan.

_Civ VI,_ at least, has some nods to the larger context. Great people are recruited from a pool, drawn in by the points generated by each civilization. Great Scientists in particular are less susceptible to the [Myth of Heroic Invention](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Heroic_theory_of_invention_and_scientific_development) as most of them provide a boost to a specific technology—boosts which are available through other means as well. Computers for example can also be boosted by having a government with 8 policy slots.

Great People in _Civ VI_ still fit squarely in to Great Man Theory. The typical counter argument to Great Man theory is that such great people are the product of the society and culture they come from, not a distinct force. Looked at this way Turing (or any other _Civ VI_ great person) is a part of scientific progress, not a boost to it. Scientififc progress creates Alan Turing, not the other way around.

None of this is meant to diminish the astounding contributions of Alan Turing or the injustice of his treatment. Turing was certainly brilliant, but 

## The Myth of Essentialism

## The Myth of Barbarians

## The Myth of Enlightenment

> In Scythia while the barbarian hordes are held back John the Baptist founds Hinduism at Stonehenge.

Religion in _Civ VI_ is never part of a tradition so much as it is a _sui generis_ creation. There is no slow drift of one tradition from another (at times catalyzed by notable stories of a specific person), instead each religion is born in a specific year entirely of its own. Each religion is built from a distinct set of early beliefs, not as an offshoot of another religion. Each religion is a distinct unprecedented moment of enlightenment.

If your game of _Civ VI_ includes Judaism, Christianity, and Islam they will be completely distinct inventions owing nothing to each other.

Unless your selection of players (flesh or AI) is particularly faith-averse, all the major religions of the world will have also been founded very early. By 622 CE when Muhammad went to Medina your religions will likely have been around for many years. By 1517 CE when Martin Luther nails up his _Ninety-five Theses_ your world may be well on the way to a religious victory (where at least half of the cities in every empire of the winning religion).

This sense of religions as competing inventions owing nothing to each, when carried over to the world around us, erases the lines of heritage and understanding the run through faith communities. There can be no cooperation between people of different faiths when they are competing meters attempting to fill up and lay claim to a city or empire.

Ultimately in _Civ VI_ religion is a product of a civilization, not vice versa. All of the Abrahamic religions can be argued (as in _[Fields of Blood](http://amzn.to/2j63yy9)_) to be reactions to systematic violence of the cultures they grew from as can many other religions, but in _Civ VI_ a religion is an extension of the empire in which it starts.

There's a certain accuracy here—treating religion as a central part of culture not as a distinct pursuit lines up with how religion has been viewed through much of human history. The modern distinction of religion from art, culture, and politics is a recent invention. But _Civ VI's_ binding of empire and religion does a disservice to religion as a vector of protest against governance. A religion in _Civ VI_ is a mask an empire wears to pursue its spread and never anything more.

While religion as an arm of empire is certainly a common historical theme, to make it inescapable is to reduce the private choice of faith in to an act of conquest. If this was the way we viewed the world around us then every "outside" religion is an infiltrator bringing victory to some other entity.

## The Myth of Victory

> In 1938 CE Norweigan forces take Uruk, becoming the greatest civilization.

This may be both the most essential and the most pernicious myth of _Civ VI_ and the entire series: that among the people of the world across the long arc of history there is a winner and that winner is a nation-state.

_Civ VI_ without victory conditions is something like _Sim City._ _Sim City_ is actually another game I love, but _Civilization_ has seen greater success in part because it has a clearer set of gameplay goals. When you sit down to play _Sim City_ your general direction is clear (to build a city) but there is no clear end point to steer towards. _Civilization_ presents competition and victory and those are compelling aspects of a game.

The idea of victory conditions in _Civ VI_ is the clearest statement of the games' implicit worldview. They are all designed such that they are achievable roughly in the near future compared to the 'present' of the game's release. With the exception of a science victory, every victory condition in _Civ VI_ requires interfering with other civilizations.

The idea that any of these is a victory is strange, and for some of them are decidedly dark.

A science victory is the least troublesome. To win a nation need only launch a series of milestone projects in space, showing the height of their technical achievement. The only oddity here is that this achievement is asserted to be for the nation, not for humanity. When your civilization reaches The Moon it is not a "giant leap for mankind," it's your second step to being a victor, a decidedly national achievement. There is no human progress in _Civ VI,_ only national progress.

Cultural victories rely on attracting more foreign tourists than any other civilization has internal tourists. This relatively pacifist victory is only slightly undermined by the universality of it. As a necessary abstraction tourism is a matter of people in and people out, but the underlying message is that my great Polish empire is so culturally significant that those backwards Americans visit in droves to see our glory. The assumption is that civilizations are intrinsically important for the artifacts they accumulate and the works they generate. There are places in _Civ VI_ that contribute nothing to the ongoing human record of great works.

Domination and Religious victories are both battles. Domination reliies on the military conquest of opposing capitals while Religious Victory requires becoming the predominant religion in other civilizations. Either way this is accomplished by sending units to spread influence (religion or military) across the globe. These are the victories the game makes most obvious, and they are the darkest when applied to the world around us. The clearest sign of success in _Civ VI_ is military force. The greates religion in _Civ VI_ is the one which has spread the furthest.

There is nothing wrong with these as victory conditions. The range of possible wins is a part of the brilliant design of the game. The trade off the pursuing one over another and the way each can undermine another is part of the enduring replayability and flexibility of the game. But when pursuing a domination victory we are playing as at best the Achaemenid Persian Empire and at worst Nazi Germany or Late Imperial Japan. 

## The World As It Is

_Civilization's_ design is for gameplay first and foremost, and it succeeds admirably in that. It's not surprising that making a game of the long historical arc of humanity requires some choices that paint the world differently than it exists around us. More surprising, though, is that people all around us _do_ see the world this way.

Games are excellent engines for exploring the experiences of others, since the core conceit of a game is to make choices based on systems that are not normally in effect on your life. When those systems reflect the pressures on the Afghani government (as in _[A Distant Plain](http://amzn.to/2j62Hxq)_) you may gain a new understanding of the conflicts there. _Civilization VI_ ostensibly puts you in the position of making choices from a position of a ruler, but what it gave me empathy for was a certain set of conservative values. When a civilization is valued over all—when it can win victory through being the greatest (again)—and it competes through culture and religion, the world becomes a dimmer place. There is no collective improvement, only a zero-sum game of winners and losers.

_Civilization VI_ is a chance to see the world through the eyes of a nationalist.
